$$
\mathscr{Lorain~wy~Lora~blea.}

\newcommand{\DS}[0]{\displaystyle}

% operators alias
\newcommand{\opn}[1]{\operatorname{#1}}
\newcommand{\card}[0]{\opn{card}}
\newcommand{\lcm}[0]{\opn{lcm}}
\newcommand{\char}[0]{\opn{char}}
\newcommand{\Char}[0]{\opn{Char}}
\newcommand{\Min}[0]{\opn{Min}}
\newcommand{\rank}[0]{\opn{rank}}
\newcommand{\Hom}[0]{\opn{Hom}}
\newcommand{\End}[0]{\opn{End}}
\newcommand{\im}[0]{\opn{im}}
\newcommand{\tr}[0]{\opn{tr}}
\newcommand{\diag}[0]{\opn{diag}}
\newcommand{\coker}[0]{\opn{coker}}
\newcommand{\id}[0]{\opn{id}}
\newcommand{\sgn}[0]{\opn{sgn}}
\newcommand{\Res}[0]{\opn{Res}}
\newcommand{\Ad}[0]{\opn{Ad}}
\newcommand{\ord}[0]{\opn{ord}}
\newcommand{\Stab}[0]{\opn{Stab}}
\newcommand{\conjeq}[0]{\sim_{\u{conj}}}
\newcommand{\cent}[0]{\u{\degree C}}
\newcommand{\Sym}[0]{\opn{Sym}}
\newcommand{\Var}[0]{\opn{Var}}
\newcommand{\wg}[0]{\wedge}
\newcommand{\Wg}[0]{\bigwedge}
\newcommand{\sq}[0]{\opn{\square}}

% symbols alias
\newcommand{\E}[0]{\exist}
\newcommand{\A}[0]{\forall}
\newcommand{\l}[0]{\left}
\newcommand{\r}[0]{\right}
\newcommand{\ox}[0]{\otimes}
\newcommand{\lra}[0]{\leftrightarrow}
\newcommand{\llra}[0]{\longleftrightarrow}
\newcommand{\iso}[1]{\overset{\sim}{#1}}
\newcommand{\eps}[0]{\varepsilon}
\newcommand{\Ra}[0]{\Rightarrow}
\newcommand{\Eq}[0]{\Leftrightarrow}
\newcommand{\d}[0]{\mathrm{d}}
\newcommand{\e}[0]{\mathrm{e}}
\newcommand{\i}[0]{\mathrm{i}}
\newcommand{\j}[0]{\mathrm{j}}
\newcommand{\k}[0]{\mathrm{k}}
\newcommand{\Ex}[0]{\mathbb{E}}
\newcommand{\D}[0]{\mathbb{D}}
\newcommand{\oo}[0]{\infty}
\newcommand{\tto}[0]{\rightrightarrows}
\newcommand{\mmap}[0]{\hookrightarrow}
\newcommand{\emap}[0]{\twoheadrightarrow}
\newcommand{\actl}[0]{\curvearrowright}
\newcommand{\actr}[0]{\curvearrowleft}
\newcommand{\nsubg}[0]{\triangleleft}
\newcommand{\nsupg}[0]{\triangleright}
\newcommand{\lin}[0]{\lim_{n\to\oo}}
\newcommand{\linf}[0]{\liminf_{n\to\oo}}
\newcommand{\lsup}[0]{\limsup_{n\to\oo}}
\newcommand{\ser}[0]{\sum_{n=1}^\oo}
\newcommand{\serz}[0]{\sum_{n=0}^\oo}
\newcommand{\isoto}[0]{\overset\sim\to}
\newcommand{\F}[0]{\mathbb F}
\newcommand{\x}[0]{\times}
\newcommand{\M}[0]{\mathbf{M}}
\newcommand{\T}[0]{\intercal}
\newcommand{\Co}[0]{\complement}
\newcommand{\alp}[0]{\alpha}
\newcommand{\lmd}[0]{\lambda}
\newcommand{\mmid}[0]{\parallel}
\newcommand{\loop}[0]{\circlearrowleft}
\newcommand{\go}[0]{\triangleright}

% symbols with parameters
\newcommand{\der}[1]{\frac{\d}{\d #1}}
\newcommand{\ul}[1]{\underline{#1}}
\newcommand{\ol}[1]{\overline{#1}}
\newcommand{\wt}[1]{\widetilde{#1}}
\newcommand{\br}[1]{\l(#1\r)}
\newcommand{\bk}[1]{\l[#1\r]}
\newcommand{\ev}[1]{\l.#1\r|}
\newcommand{\wh}[1]{\widehat{#1}}
\newcommand{\eval}[1]{\l[\!\l[#1\r]\!\r]}
\newcommand{\abs}[1]{\l|#1\r|}
\newcommand{\bs}[1]{\boldsymbol{#1}}
\newcommand{\dat}[1]{\bs{\mathrm{#1}}}
\newcommand{\env}[2]{\begin{#1}#2\end{#1}}
\newcommand{\ALI}[1]{\env{aligned}{#1}}
\newcommand{\CAS}[1]{\env{cases}{#1}}
\newcommand{\pmat}[1]{\env{pmatrix}{#1}}
\newcommand{\algo}[1]{\begin{array}{r|l}#1\end{array}}
\newcommand{\dary}[2]{\l|\begin{array}{#1}#2\end{array}\r|}
\newcommand{\pary}[2]{\l(\begin{array}{#1}#2\end{array}\r)}
\newcommand{\pblk}[4]{\l(\begin{array}{c|c}{#1}&{#2}\\\hline{#3}&{#4}\end{array}\r)}
\newcommand{\u}[1]{\mathrm{#1}}
\newcommand{\t}[1]{\text{#1}}
\newcommand{\tb}[1]{\textbf{#1}}
\newcommand{\os}[2]{\overset{#1}{#2}}
\newcommand{\lix}[1]{\lim_{x\to #1}}
\newcommand{\ops}[1]{#1\cdots #1}
\newcommand{\seq}[3]{{#1}_{#2}\ops,{#1}_{#3}}
\newcommand{\dedu}[2]{\u{(#1)}\Ra\u{(#2)}}
\newcommand{\prv}[3]{\DS{{\DS #1} \over {\DS #2}}~(#3)}
$$

### Properties: Unit ball in High dimensional space

$$
\u{surface}:=\l\{(\seq x1d):\sum_{i=1}^dx_i^2=1\r\},\quad \u{interior}:=\l\{(\seq x1d):\sum_{i=1}^dx_i^2\le1\r\};\\
V(d):=\u{volume~of~}\R^d\u{~unit~ball},\quad V(d,r)=V(d)r^d.
$$

> **Question 1**
>
> When trying to sample a point within a unit ball:
>
> - How to sample it?
> - What's the (expected) norm of this random vector?

We highlight the intuition that "probability" has a lot to do with "volume". Analytically,
$$
\Pr[\bs x\text{ in ball with }r=1-\eps]=1-\underbrace{\frac{V(d)(1-\eps)^d}{V(d)}}_{\text{ratio of volume}}=1-(1-\eps)^d\overset{d\to\oo}\to1.
$$
Or there is a convenient variation:
$$
\Pr[\cdots]=1-(1-\eps)^d\ge1-\e^{-\eps d}.
$$
We focus on sampling point on the surface of the ball first. We are familiar with the algorithm below:

- Sample $x_i$ from $\mathcal N(0,1)$, and normalize $(\seq x1d)$ to yield a random point.

The uniformity of the direction is easy to prove (by entropy intuitively, or little calculation).

Given the independency of the direction and the norm of a vector, the problem is reduced to sample the norm of the vector properly. Formally, the sampling algorithm is like

- Sample $r$ from distribution $P(r)$ (which is uncertain yet);
- Sample $\bs x$ on the surface of a unit ball;
- Yield $r\bs x$.

When sampling $r$, it is required to sample $r\in[0,1]$ s.t. the density of $r$ is proportional to $r^{d-1}$. That is, $P(r)=dr^{d-1}~(r\in[0,1])$. To achieve this, we can pick $s\sim\opn{Unif}([0,1])$ and let $r=\sqrt[d]{s}$.

&nbsp;

> **Question 2**
>
> What's the relation between $V(d)$ and $A(d)$?

$$
\frac{\d}{\d r}V(d,r)=A(d,r)\Ra \frac{\d}{\d r}(V(d)r^d)=A(d)r^{d-1}.
$$

Here we know $V(d)=\frac{A(d)}{d}$.

&nbsp;

> **Question 3**
>
> Find $I:=\int_{-\oo}^{+\oo}\e^{-x^2}\d x$.

A classical problem.
$$
\ALI{
	I^2 &= \int_{-\oo}^{+\oo}\int_{-\oo}^{+\oo}\e^{-x^2}\e^{-y^2}\d x\d y\\
	&= \int_{-\oo}^{+\oo}\int_{-\oo}^{+\oo}\e^{-(x^2+y^2)}\d x\d y\\
	&= \int_0^{+\oo}\e^{-r^2}\cdot 2\pi r\d r\\
	&= \pi\int_0^{+\oo}\e^{-t}\d t\\
	&= \pi.
}
$$
Therefore, $I=\sqrt\pi$.

One step further, this may derive the formula for volumes of $n$-balls:
$$
\int\cdots\int\e^{-\sum_{i=1}^dx_i^2}\d x_1\cdots\d x_d=\pi^{\frac{d}{2}}\\
\Ra \int_0^{+\oo}\e^{-r^2}A(d,r)\d r=\pi^{\frac{d}{2}},
$$
which gives
$$
A(d)=\frac{\pi^{\frac{d}{2}}}{\underbrace{\int_0^{+\oo}\e^{-r^2}r^{d-1}\d r}_{J_{d}}}.
$$
Remains to solve: $J_d$s.

> **Question 4**
>
> Find $I_n:=\int_0^{+\oo}x^n\e^{-x}\d x$.

It gives factorials, deriving the Gamma function $\Gamma(t+1):=\int_0^{+\oo}x^t\e^{-x}\d x$ as a generalization.

Back to $J_d$s:
$$
\ALI{
	J_d &= \int_0^{+\oo}\e^{-r^2}r^{d-1}\d r\\
	&= \int_0^{+\oo} \e^{-t}t^{\frac{d-1}{2}}\d t^{\frac{1}{2}}\\
	&= \frac{1}{2}\int_0^{+\oo}e^{-t}t^{\frac{d}{2}-1}\d t\\
	&= \frac{1}{2}\Gamma\br{\frac{d}{2}}.
}
$$
Therefore, $A(d)=\frac{2\pi^{d/2}}{\Gamma(d/2)}$ and $V(d)=\frac{2\pi^{d/2}}{d\Gamma(d/2)}$.

&nbsp;

Next step, we are to illustrate that the mass of a ball is concentrated on its equator in a high dimensional space.

The reason is obvious: we may calculate the volume (mass) by integrating on the first axis, where
$$
\d V=V(d-1)(1-x_1^2)^{\frac{d-1}{2}}\d x_1
$$
just causes the phenomenon:
$$
\ALI{
	V_h:=\int_{h}^1V\br{d-1,\sqrt{1-x_1^2}}\d x_1 &= V(d-1)\int_h^1(1-x_1^2)^{\frac{d-1}{2}}\d x_1\\
	&\le V(d-1)\int_h^1 \e^{-x_1^2\frac{d-1}{2}}\d x_1\\
	&\le V(d-1)\int_h^{+\oo}\frac{x_1}{h}\e^{-x_1^2\frac{d-1}{2}}\d x_1\\
	&= \frac{V(d-1)}{2h}\int_{h^2}^{+\oo}\e^{-t\frac{d-1}{2}}\d t\\
	&= \frac{V(d-1)}{(d-1)h}\e^{-h^2\frac{d-1}{2}}.
}
$$
For the whole half ball, we may estimate its lower bound with the volume of the cylinder inside it. If the height of the cylinder is $h'$, then
$$
\frac{V(d)}{2}\ge V_{\u{cylinder}}=h'\x V(d-1,\sqrt{1-h'^2})=V(d-1)h'(1-h'^2)^{\frac{d-1}{2}}.
$$
Pick $h'=\frac{1}{\sqrt{d-1}}$ for the tightest bound:
$$
\frac{V(d)}{2}\ge V(d-1)\cdot\frac{1}{\sqrt{d-1}}\br{1-\frac{1}{d-1}}^{\frac{d-1}{2}}\ge\frac{V(d-1)}{2\sqrt{d-1}}
$$
and set $h=\frac{c}{\sqrt{d-1}}$,
$$
V_h\le\frac{V(d-1)}{c\sqrt{d-1}}\e^{-\frac{c^2}{2}}.
$$
Therefore,
$$
\frac{2V_h}{V(d)}\le\frac{2}{c}\e^{-\frac{c^2}{2}}.
$$

> **Theorem**
>
> $\seq{\bs x}1n$ are uniformly and independently sampled from the interior of a unit ball, then with the probability of $p\ge 1-\frac{1}{n}$:
>
> (a) $\A i,~\|\bs x_i\|\ge 1-\frac{2\ln n}{d}$;
>
> (b) $\A i\neq j,~|\bs x_i\cdot \bs x_j|<\sqrt{\frac{6\ln n}{d-1}}$.

*→ Proof.* Use estimations above and take a union bound.

&nbsp;

Look back at the property $\lim_{d\to\oo}V(d)=0$. We define the intersection of $d$ equators is the box of a $d$-unit ball. Then when sampling $\bs x$ in the ball:
$$
\Pr[\bs x\text{ not in box}]\le d\x\frac{2}{c}\e^{-\frac{c^2}{2}}\overset{c=2\sqrt{\ln d}}{\le}\frac{1}{d}\le\frac{1}{2}.
$$
This goes contradictory with our intuition: this box should be quite small since the mass proves to concentrate on the surface of the ball. Why is that?

The induction is correct so let's just change our intuition: a proper 2D visualization of a high-dimensional ball should be a "star" (think about it in your mind) instead of a naive 2D ball.

> **Gaussian Annulus Theorem**
>
> For all $\beta\le\sqrt{d}$, with the probability $1-3\e^{-c\beta^2}$, $|\bs x|\in[\sqrt{d}-\beta,\sqrt{d}+\beta]$, where $c$ is a fixed and calculable constant.

&nbsp;

> **Johnson-Lindenstrauss's Algorithm (JL algo.)**
>
> For $n$ points in $\R^d$, $\seq{\bs v}1n$, $\eps\in(0,1)$, there exists an algorithm who constructs a map $f:\R^d\to\R^k$ where $k\ge\frac{3\ln n}{c\eps^2}$, and with probability at least $1-\frac{3}{2n}$, ($c$ is the constant mentioned above), $f$ is $\eps$-pairwise-distance-preserving, i.e.
> $$
> \A i\neq j,~(1-\eps)\|\bs v_i-\bs v_j\|\le\|f(\bs v_i)-f(\bs v_j)\|\le(1+\eps)\|\bs v_i-\bs v_j\|.
> $$

*→ Proof.* Sample $\seq{\bs u}1k$ uni. & ind. on the $d$-unit ball, and set $f':\bs v\mapsto\pmat{\bs v\cdot\bs u_1&\cdots&\bs v\cdot \bs u_k}^\T$. This actually gives a Gaussian vector on $k$-unit ball. Therefore, a unit vector $\bs v$ is expected to be mapped to a vector of norm $\sqrt k$. That is, a distance vector $\bs v_i-\bs v_j$ is expected to be scaled $\sqrt{k}$ times (confirmed by Gaussian annulus theorem and union bound), independent with the vector itself. $f=\frac{1}{\sqrt k}f'$ meets our desire with high (could be quantified with little calculation) probability.

