$$
\mathscr{Lorain~wy~Lora~blea.}

\newcommand{\DS}[0]{\displaystyle}

% operators alias
\newcommand{\opn}[1]{\operatorname{#1}}
\newcommand{\card}[0]{\opn{card}}
\newcommand{\lcm}[0]{\opn{lcm}}
\newcommand{\char}[0]{\opn{char}}
\newcommand{\Char}[0]{\opn{Char}}
\newcommand{\Min}[0]{\opn{Min}}
\newcommand{\rank}[0]{\opn{rank}}
\newcommand{\Hom}[0]{\opn{Hom}}
\newcommand{\End}[0]{\opn{End}}
\newcommand{\im}[0]{\opn{im}}
\newcommand{\tr}[0]{\opn{tr}}
\newcommand{\diag}[0]{\opn{diag}}
\newcommand{\coker}[0]{\opn{coker}}
\newcommand{\id}[0]{\opn{id}}
\newcommand{\sgn}[0]{\opn{sgn}}
\newcommand{\Res}[0]{\opn{Res}}
\newcommand{\Ad}[0]{\opn{Ad}}
\newcommand{\ord}[0]{\opn{ord}}
\newcommand{\Stab}[0]{\opn{Stab}}
\newcommand{\conjeq}[0]{\sim_{\u{conj}}}
\newcommand{\cent}[0]{\u{\degree C}}
\newcommand{\Sym}[0]{\opn{Sym}}
\newcommand{\Var}[0]{\opn{Var}}
\newcommand{\wg}[0]{\wedge}
\newcommand{\Wg}[0]{\bigwedge}
\newcommand{\sq}[0]{\opn{\square}}

% symbols alias
\newcommand{\E}[0]{\exist}
\newcommand{\A}[0]{\forall}
\newcommand{\l}[0]{\left}
\newcommand{\r}[0]{\right}
\newcommand{\ox}[0]{\otimes}
\newcommand{\lra}[0]{\leftrightarrow}
\newcommand{\llra}[0]{\longleftrightarrow}
\newcommand{\iso}[1]{\overset{\sim}{#1}}
\newcommand{\eps}[0]{\varepsilon}
\newcommand{\Ra}[0]{\Rightarrow}
\newcommand{\Eq}[0]{\Leftrightarrow}
\newcommand{\d}[0]{\mathrm{d}}
\newcommand{\e}[0]{\mathrm{e}}
\newcommand{\i}[0]{\mathrm{i}}
\newcommand{\j}[0]{\mathrm{j}}
\newcommand{\k}[0]{\mathrm{k}}
\newcommand{\Ex}[0]{\mathbb{E}}
\newcommand{\D}[0]{\mathbb{D}}
\newcommand{\oo}[0]{\infty}
\newcommand{\tto}[0]{\rightrightarrows}
\newcommand{\mmap}[0]{\hookrightarrow}
\newcommand{\emap}[0]{\twoheadrightarrow}
\newcommand{\actl}[0]{\curvearrowright}
\newcommand{\actr}[0]{\curvearrowleft}
\newcommand{\nsubg}[0]{\triangleleft}
\newcommand{\nsupg}[0]{\triangleright}
\newcommand{\lin}[0]{\lim_{n\to\oo}}
\newcommand{\linf}[0]{\liminf_{n\to\oo}}
\newcommand{\lsup}[0]{\limsup_{n\to\oo}}
\newcommand{\ser}[0]{\sum_{n=1}^\oo}
\newcommand{\serz}[0]{\sum_{n=0}^\oo}
\newcommand{\isoto}[0]{\overset\sim\to}
\newcommand{\F}[0]{\mathbb F}
\newcommand{\x}[0]{\times}
\newcommand{\M}[0]{\mathbf{M}}
\newcommand{\T}[0]{\intercal}
\newcommand{\Co}[0]{\complement}
\newcommand{\alp}[0]{\alpha}
\newcommand{\lmd}[0]{\lambda}
\newcommand{\mmid}[0]{\parallel}
\newcommand{\loop}[0]{\circlearrowleft}
\newcommand{\go}[0]{\triangleright}

% symbols with parameters
\newcommand{\der}[1]{\frac{\d}{\d #1}}
\newcommand{\ul}[1]{\underline{#1}}
\newcommand{\ol}[1]{\overline{#1}}
\newcommand{\wt}[1]{\widetilde{#1}}
\newcommand{\br}[1]{\l(#1\r)}
\newcommand{\bk}[1]{\l[#1\r]}
\newcommand{\ev}[1]{\l.#1\r|}
\newcommand{\wh}[1]{\widehat{#1}}
\newcommand{\eval}[1]{\l[\!\l[#1\r]\!\r]}
\newcommand{\abs}[1]{\l|#1\r|}
\newcommand{\bs}[1]{\boldsymbol{#1}}
\newcommand{\dat}[1]{\bs{\mathrm{#1}}}
\newcommand{\env}[2]{\begin{#1}#2\end{#1}}
\newcommand{\ALI}[1]{\env{aligned}{#1}}
\newcommand{\CAS}[1]{\env{cases}{#1}}
\newcommand{\pmat}[1]{\env{pmatrix}{#1}}
\newcommand{\algo}[1]{\begin{array}{r|l}#1\end{array}}
\newcommand{\dary}[2]{\l|\begin{array}{#1}#2\end{array}\r|}
\newcommand{\pary}[2]{\l(\begin{array}{#1}#2\end{array}\r)}
\newcommand{\pblk}[4]{\l(\begin{array}{c|c}{#1}&{#2}\\\hline{#3}&{#4}\end{array}\r)}
\newcommand{\u}[1]{\mathrm{#1}}
\newcommand{\t}[1]{\text{#1}}
\newcommand{\tb}[1]{\textbf{#1}}
\newcommand{\os}[2]{\overset{#1}{#2}}
\newcommand{\lix}[1]{\lim_{x\to #1}}
\newcommand{\ops}[1]{#1\cdots #1}
\newcommand{\seq}[3]{{#1}_{#2}\ops,{#1}_{#3}}
\newcommand{\dedu}[2]{\u{(#1)}\Ra\u{(#2)}}
\newcommand{\prv}[3]{\DS{{\DS #1} \over {\DS #2}}~(#3)}
$$

### Perception Algorithm

Recall that an linear classifier with parameter $\dat w$ predicts the label of $\dat x_t$ as $\opn{sign}((\dat w\mid \dat x_t))$. Here we introduce Hinge loss:
$$
\u{Hinge}(\dat w,\dat x_t):=\CAS{
	0,&(\dat w\mid\dat x_t)y_t\ge 1;\\
	1-(\dat w\mid\dat x_t)y_t,&(\dat w\mid \dat x_t)y_t<1.
}
$$
Say the optimal classifier $\dat w^*$ minimized the total Hinge loss (differs from *Linear Classifier* section, where we assumed $y_t(\dat x_t\mid\dat w^*)\ge 1$, or total Hinge loss is $0$). We can replay the proof at *Linear Classifier* section but with a different upper bound:
$$
(\dat w_t\mid \dat w^*)\le m-\sum_{i=1}^t\opn{Hinge}(\dat w^*,\dat x_i).
$$
The lower bound remains the same:
$$
(\dat w_{t+1}\mid\dat w_{t+1})\le(\dat w_t\mid\dat w_t)+r^2.
$$
Assume the update (mistake) time is $m$, then
$$
\sqrt mr\|\dat w^*\|\ge\|\dat w_m\|\|\dat w^*\|\ge m-\sum_{i=1}^m\opn{Hinge}(\dat w^*,\dat x_i)\\
\Ra \sum_{i=1}^m\opn{Hinge}(\dat w^*,\dat x_i)\ge m-\sqrt mr\|\dat w^*\|.
$$
### Streaming Algorithm

A classical problem is weighted sampling in a stream. Let $a_1,a_2,\cdots,a_t,\cdots$ be positive weights. We maintain current sum $s$ and current sample $x_t$, and when receiving $a_{t+1}$:
$$
s\gets s+a_{t+1},\\
x_t\gets a_{t+1}~\text{w.p.}~\frac{a_{t+1}}{s}.
$$
&nbsp;

Another one is majority maintenance. Let $\seq a1n\in[m]$, $n>2m$. We need to report the strict majority $k\in[m]$ if it exists, or $0$ otherwise. A memory lower bound should be $m~\u{bit}$, since if the latter half votes are all the same, we have to distinguish all $2^{m}-1$ subsets of votes that occur in the former half.

But we know how to bypass this bound: we don't require the algorithm to report $0$ when no strict majority exists. Now we maintain current "winner" and his "hit point" $(w,h)$, and when receiving $a_t$:
$$
(w,h)\gets\CAS{
	(w,h+1),&w=a_t;\\
	(w,h-1),&w\neq a_t,h\neq 0;\\
	(a_t,1),&w\neq a_t,h=0.
}
$$
Final $w$ will be reported. This algorithm can be easily extended to maintain all $\frac{m}{k}$-majority by maintaining $k$ pairs of $(w_i,h_i)$.

&nbsp;

Now let's consider distinct element counting problem. Let $\seq a1n\in[m]$. We need to report $\#\{\seq a1t\}$ for all $t$. The memory bound is $\mathcal O(m)$ obviously. But there is an elegant random algorithm to handle this.

Recall $\Ex_{X\sim\opn{Unif}([0,1])^k}[\min_i X_i]=\frac{1}{k+1}$ (I love its combinational meaning! You may imagine an elegant proof to it). We pick a hash function $h$ whose output are pairwise independent, and we maintain $v_t=\min_{i=1}^t h(a_i)$. As this pseudo-random value concentrate to $\frac{1}{c+1}$, we can estimate $c$ via $v_t$. Take $h(a_i)=(Aa_i+B)\bmod p$ where $A,B\sim\opn{Unif}(\Z_p)^2$ as an example, Chinses Remainder Theorem guarantees that $h$ is pairwise independent function.

> **Theorem 1**
>
> Let $d^*$ be the ground truth of $|\{\seq a1t\}|$, and then
> $$
> \Pr\l[\frac{d^*}{6}\le\frac{p}{v}\le 6d^*\r]\ge\frac{2}{3}-\frac{d^*}{p}.
> $$

*→ Proof.* We are to bound $v$ to $[\frac{p}{6d^*},\frac{6p}{d^*}]$. Let $\{\seq b1{d^*}\}=\{\seq a1t\}$, we can bound
$$
\Pr\l[v<\frac{p}{6d^*}\r]=\Pr\l[\E k~h(b_k)<\frac{p}{6d^*}\r]\le d^*\cdot\frac{1}{6d^*}=\frac{1}{6}.
$$
(Flooring or ceiling constants are ignored.)

For $\frac{6p}{d^*}<v$, we need to introduce a trick: we want to bound $\Pr\l[\A k~h(b_k)>\frac{6p}{d^*}\r]$ but $h(b_k)$ are merely pairwise independent. We may construct a sum of another random variable and use Chebyshev bound, which requires variant that only relies on pairwise independency. Here, let $Y_k=\mathbb 1_{h(b_k)\le 6p/d^*}$, we have
$$
\ALI{
	\Pr\l[\A k~h(b_k)>\frac{6p}{d^*}\r] &= \Pr\l[\sum_{i=1}^{d^*}Y_i=0\r]\\
	&\le \Pr\l[\abs{\sum Y_i-\Ex\l[\sum Y_i\r]}\ge\Ex\l[\sum Y_i\r]\r]\\
	&\le \frac{\sum\Var[Y_i]}{\Ex\l[\sum Y_i\r]^2}\\
	&\le \frac{\sum\Ex[Y_i]}{\Ex\l[\sum Y_i\r]^2}\\
	&= \frac{1}{d^*\Ex[Y_i]}\\
	&= \frac{1}{6}.
}
$$
&nbsp;

Now let's estimate the unbalance rate $\sum_c(\#\{i:a_i=c\})^2$ for $\{\seq a1n\}$. Like the method above, we take a hash function $h:[m]\to\{\pm 1\}$ whose outputs are pairwise independent. It is easy to check
$$
\Ex\bk{\br{\sum_{i=1}^n h(a_i)}^2}=\sum_c(\#\{i:a_i=c\})^2.
$$
### Matrix Sampling

We want to sketch the multiplication of two $n\x n$ matrix $A=\pmat{\bs a_1&\cdots&\bs a_n}$ and $B=\pmat{\bs b_1^\T\\\vdots\\\bs b_n^\T}$, where
$$
AB=\sum_{k=1}^n\bs a_k\bs b_k^\T.
$$
Obviously $n\bs a_k\bs b_k^\T$ where $k\gets\opn{Unif}([n])$ is just a unbiased estimation of $AB$, but it is not satisfactory (especially when $\bs a$ and $\bs b$ are sparse).

A generalization of this method is to pick $k$ from distribution $P$ over $[n]$ and output $\frac{1}{P(k)}\bs a_k\bs b_k^\T$. We should set $P$ properly to minimize the "variance" $\Ex[\|X-\Ex[X]\|_F^2]$. Since $\Ex[X]=AB$ is fixed, our goal is to minimize
$$
\mathcal L(\seq p1k,\lmd)=\sum_{k=1}^n\frac{1}{p_k}\|\bs a_k\bs b_k^\T\|_F^2+\lmd(1-p_1-\cdots-p_n),
$$
Therefore,
$$
\frac{\part\mathcal L}{\part p_k}=-\frac{\|\bs a_k\bs b_k^\T\|_F^2}{p_k^2}-\lmd=0\Ra p_k\propto\|\bs a_k\|\|\bs b_k\|.
$$
For implementation simplicity we set $p_k\propto\|a_k\|^2$, and then we have
$$
\Ex[\|X-\Ex[X]\|_F^2]=\|A\|_F^2\|B\|_F^2.
$$
If we pick $s$ instead of $1$ sample,
$$
\Ex\bk{\l\|\frac{\sum X_i}{s}-\Ex[X]\r\|_F^2}=\frac{\|A\|_F^2\|B\|_F^2}{s}.
$$
However it works just on low-rank matrices. $A=B=\bs 1$ can easily make us sad :(

&nbsp;

Let's go on to sketch just a matrix $A$. An intuitive method is to write $A=A\x\bs 1$ and perform the sketch above. But, $\bs 1$ is full ranked, frustrate us again :(

Now, our goal is to find a "pseudo-identity matrix" $P$ s.t. $A\approx AP$.

With the sampling method above, we may pick $s$ rows of $A$, say $\{\seq r1s\}$, and scale them to form $R$, s.t. $A^\T A\approx R^\T R$. Specifically we have a bound
$$
\Ex\l[\l\|A^\T A-R^\T R\r\|_F^2\r]\le\frac{\|A\|_F^4}{s}.
$$
Let the space $\mathcal R=\lang \seq r1s\rang$, we set $P$ to make $P|_{\mathcal R}=\id$ and $P|_{\mathcal R^\perp}=\bs 0$, which means $PR^\T y=R^\T y$ for all $y$ and $Px=0$ for all other vector $x$. An easy construction is $P=R^\T(RR^\T)^{-1}R$ where $(RR^\T)^{-1}$ is the Moore-Penrose inversion of $RR^\T$.

Let's bound the spectrum norm of $A-AP$ (Note for matrix $A$, $\|A\|_2$ means its spectrum norm):
$$
\ALI{	
	\max_{\|v\|_2=1}\|(A-AP)v\|_2^2 &= \max_{\|v\|_2=1}\|(A-AP)(v'+v'')\|_2^2\\
	&= \max_{v''\in\mathcal R^\perp,\|v''\|_2\le 1}\|Av''\|_2^2\\
	&= \max_{v''\in\mathcal R^\perp,\|v''\|_2\le 1}|v''^\T(A^\T A-R^\T R)v''|\\
	&\le \|A^\T A-R^\T R\|_2^2.
}
$$
Finally we sketch $AP$ to get $X$ of $t$ rows. Now
$$
\|X-A\|_2^2\le 2(\|X-AP\|_2^2+\|AP-A\|_2^2)
$$
is bounded successfully.

### Phase Transition of Random Graph

A random graph $\mathcal G(n,p)$ is a graph of $n$ vertexes where each edge $(u,v)$ occurs w.p. $p$ independently.

For a predicate $P$, $\Pr[P(\mathcal G(n,p))]$ usually owns a phase transition point. E.g. $P(G):G~\text{contains a ternary cycle}$, and we have
$$
\Ex[P(\mathcal G(n,p))]=\binom{n}{3}p^3\sim (np)^3.
$$
Its threshold turns out to be $p^*(n)=\frac{1}{n}$ (which means, when $p\ll p^*$, $\Pr[\cdots]\to 0$ and vise versa).

Let's go through the $p\gg p^*(n)$ part.
$$
\ALI{
	\Pr[\#\{\text{ternary cycle}\}=0] &\le \Pr[|\#-\Ex[\#]|\ge\Ex[\#]]\\
	&\le \frac{\Var\bk{\sum_{i,j,k}\mathbb 1_{ijk}}}{\Ex\bk{\sum_{i,j,k}\mathbb 1_{ijk}}^2}\\
	&\le \frac{\sum_{i,j,k}\Ex[\mathbb 1_{ijk}]+\sum_{i,j,k,i',j',k'}\opn{Cov}[\mathbb 1_{ijk},\mathbb 1_{i'j'k'}]}{(np)^6}\\
	&\sim \frac{(np)^3+n^4p^5}{(np)^6}\to 0.
}
$$
